📖 book: add doc about Cluster API updates with ClusterClass (#7298)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/operate-cluster.md

</aside>

# Upgrading Cluster API

There are some special considerations for ClusterClass regarding Cluster API upgrades when the upgrade includes a bump
of the apiVersion of infrastructure, bootstrap or control plane provider CRDs.

> It is recommended to first upgrade Cluster API and then update the apiVersions in the ClusterClass references afterwards. 
> There won't be any disruptions of the reconciliation as the Cluster topology controller is able to reconcile the Cluster 
> even with the old apiVersions in the ClusterClass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended approach is to first upgrade Cluster API and then update the apiVersions in the ClusterClass references afterwards. 
By following above steps, there won't be any disruptions of the reconciliation as the Cluster topology controller is able to reconcile the Cluster 
even with the old apiVersions in the ClusterClass.
```
nit, not blocking

When upgrading the apiVersions in references in the ClusterClass the corresponding patches have to be changed accordingly.
This includes bumping the apiVersion in the patch selector and potentially updating the JSON patch to changes in the new 
apiVersion of the referenced CRD. The following example shows how to upgrade the ClusterClass in this case. 

ClusterClass with the old apiVersion:
```yaml
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterClass
metadata:
  name: quick-start
spec:
  infrastructure:
    ref:
      apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
      kind: DockerClusterTemplate
...
  patches:
  - name: lbImageRepository
    definitions:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
        kind: DockerClusterTemplate
        matchResources:
          infrastructureCluster: true
      jsonPatches:
      - op: add
        path: "/spec/template/spec/loadBalancer/imageRepository"
        valueFrom:
          variable: lbImageRepository
```

ClusterClass with the new apiVersion:
```yaml
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterClass
metadata:
  name: quick-start
spec:
  infrastructure:
    ref:

>       apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2 # Api reference updated
```

      kind: DockerClusterTemplate
...
  patches:
  - name: lbImageRepository
    definitions:
    - selector:

>         apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2 # Api reference updated
```

</aside>

# Upgrading Cluster API

There are some special considerations for ClusterClass regarding Cluster API upgrades when the upgrade includes bumping
the apiVersion of infrastructure, bootstrap or control plane provider CRDs.

In general the Cluster topology controller always uses exactly the versions of the CRDs referenced in the ClusterClass.

> This means in the following example the Cluster topology controller uses `v1beta1` even if the `DockerClusterTemplate` already 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means in the following example the Cluster topology controller will always use `v1beta1` when reconciling/applying patches for the infrastructure ref, mo matter if the `DockerClusterTemplate` already 
```

has a `v1beta2` version.

```yaml
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterClass
metadata:
  name: quick-start
  namespace: default
spec:
  infrastructure:
    ref:
      apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
      kind: DockerClusterTemplate
...
```

> It is recommended to first upgrade Cluster API and then update the apiVersions in the ClusterClass afterwards. There won't be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to first upgrade Cluster API and then update the apiVersions in the ClusterClass references afterwards. There won't be 
```

any disruptions of the reconciliation as the Cluster topology controller is able to reconcile the Cluster even with the old 

> apiVersion in the ClusterClass. 

Reviewer: what about moving this up as a second paragraph, given that the example above is the explanation of why there won't be disruption

Reviewer: also, let's add a note about the fact that when upgrading apiVersion for references, corresponding patches should be checked and eventually changed according to API changes; in the case of external patches, before completing this operation it is required to ensure that all the external patches support the new apiVersion.
an example of how references and patches should be upgraded could really help

Reviewer: I saw this is already documented below, but we could benefit from a better separation from instruction for users from instruction for the external patches authors.

Author: > what about moving this up as a second paragraph, given that the example above is the explanation of why there won't be disruption

Done

Author: I gave it a try :)

> Please note that if the ClusterClass is updated before Cluster API the reconciliation will fail as the Cluster topology controller
> is unable to use resources in an apiVersion that doesn't exist yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that apiVersion and references in ClusterClass cannot be updated before Cluster API because the new apiVersion doesn't exist yet in the management cluster.
```

> **Inline Patches**

Reviewer: I will drop this paragraph if we can convey the same messages above / with the example

**Note**: For more details about inline patches see [Writing a ClusterClass](./write-clusterclass.md).

The patch selectors in inline patches always have to use the same apiVersion as the references in the ClusterClass. Thus, 
when updating the ClusterClass to use the new apiVersions the apiVersions in the references and in the patch selectors have 
to be both updated at the same time.

Please note that bumping a ClusterClass to a new apiVersion might require adjusting the `jsonPatches` as well as fields 
in the CRDs might have been removed, renamed or added with the new apiVersion.

> **External Patches**

Reviewer: I will move this paragraph into external patches documentation under a new "dealing with apiVersion changes" paragraph
